---
#title: "Closure in Javascript" 
date:   2018-05-09 15:04:23
#categories: [customer service]
tags: [javascript]
layout: post
---

Closure in JavaScript has developed a bit of a reputation over the years, but relax, it's actually nothing to be intimated by. Although it can be a bit tough to wrap your brain around initially, once you see in in action you'll be surprised at how simple it really can be. 

### A Quick Refresher on Variable Scope

The first thing you should be familiar with is the idea of variable scope. As you may know, in JavaScript variables defined with `var` are said to be scoped to the function they are defined in, or globally if they don't exist in any specific function. This means that anything defined inside a function only exists inside that particular function. Let's take a quick look at this in action.


```javascript
var a = "outside the function";

function functionOne() {
    var a = "inside the function";
    console.log("logged from inside the function: " + a);
}
```

Here we have two different variables named `a`. One is defined in the global frame outside of any functions, and one inside the `functionOne` function. If we were to simply log the value of `a` with `console.log()` It would display one value:

```javascript
console.log("logged from outside the function: " + a);
"logged from outside the function: outside the function"
```

But if we call `functionOne` it will log a different value:  
```javascript
functionOne();
"logged from inside the function: inside the function"
```

These different values for `a` is a result of the functional scope for variables defined with `var`. As we'll soon see, closure deals directly with the idea of variable scope, so it's important to have a good understanding of the concept.

### Nested Functions

A common practice in JavaScript is to nest one function inside of another. When this happens, functional scope applies as it always does with variables defined with `var`, but a consequence of this that might not be readily apparent is that nested functions have access to the variables of the 'parent' functions that contain it. 

Let's take a look at this in action to see what's going on: 



```javascript
function funcOne() {
  var myString = "This string is defined inside funcOne";
  function writeString() {
    console.log(myString)
  }
  writeString();
}
funcOne();
```
Output:
```
This string is defined inside funcOne
```

Here's a play-by play of what happens when `funcOne` is called:

1. `funcOne` defines a variable, `myString`, and a function, `writeString`.
2. `funcOne` then calls the `writeString` function.
3. `writeString` simply logs the variable `myString`. 

Note that `writeString` has access to `myString` automatically thanks to JS's lexical scoping. `WriteString` doesn't define the variable nor is
it passed in as a parameter.

### Your First Closure

So far so good, hopefully. Let's change to code block above slightly to make use of closure:

```javascript
function funcOne() {
  var myString = "This string is defined inside funcOne";
  function writeString() {
    console.log(myString)
  }
  return writeString;
}
var myFunc = funcOne();
myFunc();
```

```

This string is defined inside funcOne


```

Okay, so almost the same code as before, but now instead of `funcOne` defining
and then running `writeString`, it now defines it and _returns_ the function
itself.

That means when we define `myFunc` as the result of `funcOne()`, we're
essentially defining `myFunc` as the `writeString` nested function. Just as in
the first example `writeString` has access to the `myString` variable, but so
does `myFunc`.

The key thing to understand here is that when a function returns another
function that is nested inside of it, you're not only returning the nested
function, you're returning the __context in which the nested function
was
defined__. This is what's know as a closure. This is possible in JS because
functions are _first-class objects_.

Here's a more formal definition that you
may find helpful:

>A closure is the
combination of a function and the lexical environment within which that function
was declared. This environment consists of any local variables that were in-
scope at the time that the closure was created. 

-- [MDN:
Closure](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Closures)

One of the neat things that closures makes possible is functions that create
other functions, but with the same
initial conditions for every new instance.

```javascript
var makeAdder = function(a) {
  var adder = function(b) {
  console.log(a + b)
  }
  return adder 
}

var add5 = makeAdder(5);
```

The `a` parameter in the above code has been set to 5 and defined as `add5`. You
can now pass any number to `add5` and it will add 5 to it

```javascript
add5(2);
add5(7);
```

```

7
12


```

Thanks to closure we can use the `makeAdder` function to make a completely
different adder:

```javascript
var add10 = makeAdder(10);
```

Now the `a` parameter has been set to 10 and defined as `add10`.
You can now
pass any number to `add10` and 10 will be added to it

```javascript
add10(2);
add10(7);
```

```

12
17


```

Now that's neat and all, but maybe not the most practical example. Let's take a
look at some instances where closures can be quite helpful.

__Private Variables__  
Closures allow you to mimic some of the features of
object-oriented languages that JS lacks on its
own. for example, private values.

```javascript
var makeCounter = function() {
  var privateCounter = 0;
  function changeBy(val) {
    privateCounter += val;
  };
  return {
    increment: function() {
      changeBy(1);
    },
    decrement: function() {
      changeBy(-1);
    },
    value: function() {
      console.log(privateCounter);  
    }
  }  
};
```

This is very similiar to the other closures we saw above. `makeCounter` defines
an initial variable, `privateCounter`, and a function, `changeBy`, which has
access to `privateCounter`. Instead of returning a single function as we saw
earlier, it actually returns an object which contains 3 functions. Two of these
functions call the `ChangeBy` function, and as a result have access to
`privateCounter` through the magic of closure.

We can now create a new counter
and use any of these methods:

```javascript
var counter1 = makeCounter();
counter1.increment();
counter1.value();
counter1.increment();
counter1.value();
counter1.decrement();
counter1.value();
console.log(counter1.privateCounter);
```

```

1
2
1
undefined


```

We could then even create anoter counter if we wanted to, and it would not be
affected be the first one, even though they both start with the same initial
value

```javascript
var counter2 = makeCounter();
counter2.decrement();
counter2.value();
counter2.decrement();
counter2.value();
counter2.decrement();
counter2.value();
```

```

-1
-2
-3


```

Notice of course that neither `counter1` or `counter2` has direct access to the
`privateCounter`
variable, if you tried to run
`console.log(counter1.privateCounter)` it would return `undefined`. Instead the
two counter objects have to go through the `value` function. Using closures in
this way is sometimes known the _module pattern_. 

__Exercise__

Write a
function called `makeDamageCounter` that uses closure to return a new function
that can count how much damage a specific adventurer takes during an encounter
with a goblin.   

One of the reasons closure and JavaScript are so closely
associated with each
other is that it's not possible in many other languages:
>In JavaScript, if you use the function keyword inside another function, you are
creating a closure. In C and most other common languages, after a function
returns, all the local variables are no longer accessible because the  stack-
frame is destroyed. In JavaScript, if you declare a function within another
function, then the local variables can remain accessible after returning from
the function you called.

-- [StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/a/111111)
